Hello, I'm Chandrika Joshi and it's 28th of March 2024 today. I've come to Ilford in London
to talk to Anil Pabari who also came from Uganda in 1972 and he is the son of Indu Ben
Pabari.
Hello.
Hi Anil.
Hi.
So tell me, how old were you? Do you remember Uganda at all?
Very well.
Yeah, tell me about it. What was life like?
Well, we were just happy-go-lucky. You know, there we were just sort of no stress, just
playing outside. Yeah. Obviously no toys to play. We just sort of kids were just playing
outside.
Oh, right. You found your own games.
We found our own games with people around us. Obviously we had our own friends.
And you were in Saroti, yeah?
Yeah, Saroti. The only problem now is that keeping in touch with all the friends we missed.
Oh, right. All the people you missed.
Although I have kept in touch with a few, but it's been a long time.
Yeah. Do you remember when you were expelled?
Yes.
What was it like for you when you heard that you have to leave?
Initially, I didn't understand. But then when we started packing, I think that bit of trauma
was there when we saw my friends just moving away. I remember that bit.
Yeah. So one minute they were there and the next they were gone.
And then next they were all gone and then we were moving as well. And actually the journey
from Saroti to Kampala, we felt it. I felt it.
Yeah.
I remember.
Was it scary a little bit?
It was scary a little bit. Because at that time I still remember the army in between.
Yeah. The checkpoints.
The checkpoints and the army. The army lorries, yeah?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But luckily we managed to get to Kampala.
Yeah.
But obviously didn't understand why, for what reason.
Was there any excitement at all?
Not really. Not really.
Because the idea of coming to London, that thought wasn't there yet.
No.
Yeah. It wasn't there yet.
Do you remember roughly, sort of, were you travelling at daytime or evening?
Yeah. I think it was evening time.
Evening time.
And your flights came to which airport?
I think it was Stansted.
Stansted. Yeah.
Stansted.
And what happened? Was it at night you came to Stansted or daytime?
So early morning.
Early morning.
Early morning. Yeah.
Do you remember that at all or not really?
A little bit.
Okay.
Obviously because it was slightly darker and it was cold.
It was cold.
Yeah.
You know, just remember October.
Yeah. And it was cold.
Yeah.
And then that's when you feel, oh, it's supposed to be the winter here.
Yeah. It was cold.
Yeah.
And...
What else did you feel?
Because we never felt cold enough in Saroti.
No. No.
Yeah.
The temperature was the same every single day.
Exactly.
Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah.
You know, if we drained in Saroti, yeah, you're okay for a while.
And then hot again.
Yeah.
So what happened after Stansted airport?
You see, I remember going on a coach.
Uh-huh.
And you went to a place, an army barracks called in Honington.
Honington.
In Devon.
Yeah. Okay.
It was a long...
Yeah.
It was a long journey.
I still remember it was a long, long journey.
Yeah.
Obviously, half-time, we would just sleep because of the journey itself.
And sort of...
Then all I remember, we were just put in a...
Like army barracks was just like a hut.
Mm.
Yeah.
And we would just stay and sort of...
What was the food like and day-to-day life in the camp like?
It was like just try to make new friends again.
Oh, my gosh.
Yeah.
Just trying to understand.
Plus, obviously, don't forget, it was very cold.
Yeah.
It was still winter time.
It was very cold.
Yeah.
That was me.
Ah.
Yeah.
It was just like helping out.
Helping out.
Yeah.
One volunteer there.
One volunteer.
And you already started helping out.
Yeah.
Just helping out.
I mean, just...
So the older people who couldn't leave their huts, you would take food over for them.
Yeah.
It was just the food.
That's right.
Yeah.
Was there a school in Huntington camp?
Was there a little school there?
That...
I can't remember that much.
Yeah.
Because you were just too busy.
And also we didn't stay that long.
It was just a few months.
And where did you go from there?
Before that, then they said we had to go to a place in North Wales.
Okay.
An area called...
Tonton.
Something like that.
I always took a taxi.
Yeah.
And I don't know why.
I didn't understand the reason.
You don't know why you were moved.
Yeah.
I don't know why.
Okay.
So there was North Wales.
Again a long journey.
Yeah.
Again, cold.
Cold, yeah.
What did you think of that camp?
The North Walesney camp?
Again, it's like...
You know, you just took it in.
You know, you just think...
Yeah.
You know, no reason why.
We don't know why Honiton was shut down or...
Yeah.
We didn't know what was happening.
So as a child, you were in a camp.
Yeah.
You were in a camp.
So as a child, you had no idea.
You just went along with wherever they took you.
Yes, right.
Yeah.
So then...
Obviously, we were grateful they took us.
Yeah.
So that...
What are your memories of Tonforay?
Cold, as usual.
Yeah.
It was cold.
And...
Did you make friends?
Any friends there, I don't remember.
No.
Okay.
I can't remember any of the friends there.
Do you remember the school there?
No, again.
It was just...
You went to school.
You were just within the camps.
Yeah.
That's all I remember.
That's it.
I have a photo of you at school, right?
So I'll pass that on to you.
In the camp?
In the camp, yeah.
Oh.
Was there a school?
You know, Maniyat, but nothing.
Oh, it'd be wonderful.
Yeah.
That'd be wonderful.
Okay.
Yeah.
And after that, why did you choose to be housed in Dharonda or you just took whatever
was offered?
I could feel we just took whatever was offered.
Okay.
They did ask where we wanted to...
They did say...
It's only I remember because mum was telling me.
Yeah.
There was choices to go to Leicester, Birmingham, or...
And mum just didn't want to go those places.
Oh, right.
Because she knew we'll be...
Okay.
...in a propaganda.
So they just wanted a little more freedom, right?
Freedom, yeah.
Yeah.
So she just chose...
And plus, someone must have mentioned to her, schools in the... in Mid Wales or South Wales
are much better than in Birmingham or Leicester.
Oh, right.
Okay.
So it was for school reasons.
Yeah.
For schooling reasons only.
Right.
Okay.
She didn't want us to be laid down, just doing penny jobs elsewhere.
Yeah.
She wanted you to be educated.
Yeah, educated.
Uh-huh.
So money was not the issue.
Yeah.
Do you remember when you first came to Pennygrife?
We...
Sort of.
Because remember the house.
Yeah.
Was it by coach they brought you or something?
Oh, yes.
Yeah, by coach.
Yes, by coach.
And you were then just reminded...
Tell me what it was like to be dropped off there and...
I mean, it was...
It was good because you thought, wow, place for our own, of our own.
Remember, we were squashed in.
Yeah.
In the camp.
Yeah, we found an angel there.
Yeah.
And...
Who?
Harding.
Harding, Miss Harding.
Miss Harding.
Someone who lived in Pennygrife by the name of Miss Harding.
Yeah.
So she basically adopted you as a family.
Yeah, she...
What was...
Was she a teacher or what?
She was like a social worker, was she?
I don't know.
I don't know how she...
But she managed to find out.
Uh-huh.
There's an Asian family coming.
And she really helped us out.
She even, on our behalf, wrote to Margaret Tatta, Tatta, Tatta, Tatta, Tatta, Tatta,
Margaret Tatta.
At that time.
Yeah.
Because...
Because Hitesh was here before the exodus.
Yeah.
So he was not classed as...
Like, we were classed as British.
Oh, yeah.
But he wasn't?
I don't know how he was...
Oh, he was...
Oh, his education...
No, sorry.
His education...
Yeah.
Was to be paid.
But we had left Uganda.
Oh, right.
Okay.
Yeah.
Because we left Uganda.
So he was not entitled to free education.
To free education.
But Miss Harding wrote to them, the education secretary.
Oh, did she?
Margaret Tatta.
Yeah.
I think that was it when Hitesh was going to university.
Because that's what they wanted him to pay as an overseas passer.
That's it, yes.
And she basically sorted that out.
Yes, yes.
That's it.
That's it, yeah.
Okay.
Miss Harding.
Yeah.
Gosh.
Yeah, she even came to Ilford once.
Oh, did she?
Yeah.
Uh-huh.
She stayed with us.
Gosh, how nice.
Yeah.
But after obviously going back and she passed away and...
She was a Miss Harding, right?
So she didn't have children or anything.
No, no.
I don't think she had anyone.
No, she didn't have anyone.
No.
So, no, no.
She had some kind of family.
Yeah.
We tried to get in touch with her.
But there's a row she's passed away.
Yeah.
You know, obviously.
So initially, she was a Miss Harding.
Yeah.
You know, obviously.
Initially, you thought, oh, the house is really nice.
But, you know, what were the drawbacks?
Oh, severe damp conditions.
Oh, it was really damp.
It was freezing.
Yeah.
There was no heating?
Just that one room coal fire.
Oh, you had an open coal fire.
Open coal fire in just one room.
Wow.
And that was the only warm place in that whole house.
Yeah, the only warm place.
Yeah.
So, you had to buy this fuel there?
So, yeah, they actually used to provide that.
Oh, right.
Like, color gas.
Yeah.
Color gas.
But I think it was more...
It was liquid, was it?
It was liquid.
Yeah.
So, yeah.
It was liquid, wasn't it?
That bit I can't remember.
I don't know.
But the oil heaters or whatever.
Something like that.
And you were all very young then.
We were kids.
Yeah.
So, you went to primary school.
You were in primary school to start with?
Yeah.
Initially, I went to comprehensive school.
Oh, you were put in comprehensive straight away.
Initially.
Yeah.
And then, obviously, they gave me...
On the first day, they gave me some kind of test.
Yeah.
And obviously, I passed the test, like maths test, easily.
And then, one of the teachers said,
I'm going to go to the math test.
And obviously, I passed the test, like maths test, easily.
Yeah.
And the one of the teachers said,
I shouldn't be here.
Yeah.
Because, I became...
I was one of the top one.
Yeah.
They said, oh you should go to grammar school.
And they straight away changed me to a grammar school.
Okay.
So, that's why I went to post grammar school.
Oh, that's why you went to post grammar.
Yeah.
And you went...
So...
Oh, right, okay.
So, I went to post grammar there.
Yeah.
And...
So...
So, I went to post grammar there.
Yeah.
And...
Obviously, initially, the accent was different.
Yeah, English was.
Our accent would have been different as well.
So how did you find the school?
The school was okay.
They could see.
The teachers were really very accommodating.
They knew we'd come from abroad.
They knew we were refugees.
They knew our background that way.
Plus, I knew I was doing well in school compared to their own students.
So they were quite surprised that way.
I remember that.
Oh really, I see.
Yeah.
And I still remember one of the friends and lunchtime, you know, mom used to give me food
and I used to share it with them.
Oh, did you?
Did they like it?
Yeah.
I remember a particular guy, he still remembers me.
I remember phoning him the other day.
He said, I remember you.
Oh really?
Because he met my youngest brother, my brother Surin, somewhere in a pub.
And just talking about Wales.
And he said, oh, I used to have an Indian friend called Anil Papari.
Oh my god.
Under the blue.
And Surin didn't say anything for a minute.
And then after a while, because that's my brother.
Good to god.
What a coincidence.
Exactly.
And then I phoned him.
He said, did you?
Okay, I remember you know why?
You were so kind.
I said, why?
Okay, I used to share your food with me.
How sweet.
And I used to help him in his maths homework.
Oh, right, okay.
Because people used to bully him.
Oh, did they?
At school.
And I used to share my food with him and help him with his homework.
So that impression, I haven't seen him since 1978 when I left for university.
But he still remembers me that way.
So school wise.
After my story.
Yeah, the school was good.
The school was good.
For me, good.
And it became more comprehensive.
Later.
I think after I must have gone.
After I did.
And while I was there, the students actually chose me to become the head boy there.
Oh, why you say head boy?
So I became the head boy when I was in sixth form.
Oh wow.
Yeah.
So I still remember the teachers making me a role model for them.
Look, you should be like him.
Really, like Anil Babari?
Yeah.
Gosh.
And then you left in 78 to go to university?
To go to university.
And what did you study?
Computing.
Oh wow.
So I went to Norwich.
Yeah.
And parents were still in Benwick, right?
When you went to Norwich, right?
That's right.
Okay.
And?
And that's when, I think after a year later they came to London.
Yeah, a year later they came to London, didn't they?
Yeah.
Okay.
So tell me a little bit how mum's contribution towards, mum and dad's contribution towards
setting up a business from nothing.
Oh, you see, it gives you inspiration, isn't it?
But how their hard work.
Very hard work.
Builds into you.
Yeah.
So they set it up from nothing.
From nothing.
Yeah.
Literally nothing.
From nothing.
Literally from nothing.
Because we didn't have anything to start off with.
No.
Yeah.
So the good thing is that we have unity in our family.
So the whole idea is to help each other.
Yeah.
You know, it's not like mine and yours.
It's ours.
Yeah.
It's always been ours.
So that's what they've taught us.
Families come first.
And you've seen them work hard.
We've seen them work hard.
Yeah.
Both mum and dad.
When did mum stop working in the cooking?
Well, she...
In commercial cooking.
I think after she had a stroke.
Okay.
But we still, we still then just to keep her active, we wanted her to come in.
Yeah.
You have a shop, yeah?
You have a shop.
We just...
I mean, I formally retired last year, first of November last year.
Okay.
Yeah.
For the shop, we just now listed out.
Okay.
From first of November last year, yeah.
Yeah.
But unfortunately, in 1998, I was diagnosed with epilepsy.
Okay.
Yeah.
Out of the blue.
So that changed your life really?
That changed my life.
Yeah.
So then luckily the shop helped me.
Because you had your own professional career, didn't you?
I did.
Yeah.
So I was hoping...
You had to stop that with 1998 after the epileptic attacks?
Yeah.
A little bit, yeah.
Because in 2003, I had to leave my job.
2003, you had to leave, right?
Yeah.
Okay.
Because obviously with epilepsy, they take your license away.
All right.
Okay.
So you had to travel by tubes and trains.
Yeah.
And that's not an easy job to do.
No.
So one thing I don't like is too much noise and too many people around me.
But luckily, like you say, we had family support.
Yeah.
And something to fall back on this business, yeah.
You have children?
Two daughters.
Yeah.
Although my daughters came slightly late, but they came straight after.
One after each other.
Yeah.
Literally 10 months apart.
Oh, 10 months apart.
Oh, fantastic.
Yeah.
Two fantastic girls.
Especially the older one.
Yeah.
The one's getting engaged tomorrow.
The one is getting engaged.
Tomorrow.
The one is married already.
No.
The other one's younger than her.
Oh, righty.
She's younger.
Yeah.
My older one's married.
Older one is married, yeah.
I always say I got four daughters.
Four daughters, yeah.
Because the two are your brothers, yeah.
Yes.
And you really look at your brother as your family.
Exactly.
Because they always see them grow up together.
Yeah.
The all four are so close, yeah.
Really good.
So...
Yeah.
And she...
Because now she's become a pharmacist.
But I always wanted to push her away.
Right, right.
You can look.
You be on your own.
Yeah.
And she looks after me.
She does, doesn't she?
Since she was young.
Really?
When I have...
Yeah, you have a fet.
Fets, I normally cut my tongue.
Oh, yeah.
Bite into my tongue.
Yeah.
And I bleed a lot.
And she used to clean me at that young age.
Oh.
Yeah.
Amika.
So...
She's like...
Like a little mother.
Yeah, she is.
Yeah.
I always call her that.
Little mother.
I always call her my ma, yeah?
Yeah.